A lot of people, big men already. As a man asked him,
about 65 or 70 years old, the other one was like 45
years old. They were standing next to a post of the
telephone. And the big man said to the other one, he
said, hey, this wire is hole, how do you speak for
him? Then the other one said to him, but how are you
so dumb like that? Don't you see that the voice runs
through the electricity? He said, well, I thought
the wire was hollowed out. Well, there's the
ignorance.
It's like I say, people didn't know how to read.
Many took a piece of paper and looked at it, but they
didn't know anything. That's all that happened. I
also came to work, I earned 15 cents. Taking care of
some... They had like a dairy here. The becerros,
you know what they are? Beceros. Beceros, sí.
Bueno, cuidaba yo los beceros acá, vacina a las
pastas, a cuidarlos allá, y la tarde los traigo
allí. Y eso ganaba 15 centavos por día, nada más.
Pero en ese tiempo estaba todo muy barato también.
Sí. Mucho, muy barato todo. And now, people get
sick. A lot of people died because there were no
doctors. Yes. In those days, Mexico was very far
behind. That's why. And in which town do you live in
Mexico? In which town? What's your town called? I
used to live in a very big farm that the Spaniards
had. Many years ago, when Spain ruled Mexico for a
long time. It was called... La hacienda esa se
llamaba Piautillos. El estado de San Luis. De San
Luis corría la línea de San Luis a Tampico. Y sobre
la línea esa estaba ese lugar. Y allí es donde mi
papá allí, pues allí se crió, yo creo. Y allí nací
yo. Y me crié hasta de 12 años. Me vine para acá, para
la frontera. Y así estuvimos acá. Pero, pues la
gente muy pobrecita, ¿sabes? No... Well, there
was nowhere to earn money. There was nowhere to
work. People didn't get paid for their work. They
didn't get a good salary or anything. That's why.
And as I say, people were missing from school so
they knew something. So they could read
newspapers and find out about other places, how
things were. But without knowing anything, they
couldn't know anything. And what year did your
family come here to the border? No. In what year? In
1912.
When they
killed Madero, it was in 1913. It was when they
killed Madero and the generals of Porfirio Díaz.
between
Piedras Negras and Viacuña, between Egle Paz and
the river. Yes. That's where we were. Then he came
to take a Mexican commission here to the state of
Texas, because a rich man from Monterrey had land
in that place, and a part of land from the
government too, and he took people from here, to
plant there if they had their mules, their tools.
He took everything. It didn't cost him anything,
just the passage and the family. And everyone went
to plant there, to that place. But in the
revolution that was in Mexico, the people said
that the federals, the people of the federation,
the government that has been doing to the people
this and that, well, many came and left, just like
those who leave for the people. They left
everything. And they didn't do anything to him. We
were there, they didn't do anything to anyone.
Yes, they kicked us out because they said that...
Because a son, the man who took that place was
called Lorenzo González Treviño. And he had a son
too. And he raised people in favor of Carranza.
Yes, Carranza. He was the one who fought against
Victoriano Huerta. And when the Federals got
there, they said that even the Peruvians had to
kill and burn everything. But they didn't do
anything. Because at that time, the Federals were
in Torreón. And Francisco Villa attacked Torreón
and beat them. And they only knew that they were
here in Piedras Negras and they ran to the
mountains. And they left everything. They didn't
do anything. And that year, there were some very
big harvests that happened, like no other year.
Well, but whatever it was, Mexico was very tough
because, as here, God doesn't want there to be a war
here. Because if here in Brine there is a general
with so many people, another Houston general
comes to attack this one with twice as many people,
this one doesn't wait for him, because he says, I
won't resist. They left here, and that's what they
did there. The warehouses that they had, they lit
fire to them. The people, what were they going to do
afterwards? They were fine there, the government
gave them food for the soldiers and the people. But
the people? They got very tough there. That's why I
say, I hope they don't do that here. Because there
were times when people didn't have anything to
eat. That's the truth. It's a very hard war,
wherever it is. That's why I say that I hope that
this never comes here, because many of us are going
to die of hunger here if we live. But I hope not.
That's how it happened in Mexico, and that's why I
came here too. I went to this side, looking for
life, the truth, looking to work to live. That's
why I came, because it was already very hard, they
couldn't invest anything, because after the
parties that there were, Carranza and Huerta,
then many got up and then many were not fighting,
but stealing from the rich. They became animals
and everything. I'm not talking about that I live
in Carranza, Huerta and no. That's why we came
here. Do you want to listen to it? It's being
recorded, right? Yes. It's being recorded. Your
book is very good. I write it, you listen to it, and
then you write it. I've never been to Mexico. I
haven't been to Mexico. Yes, I know Mexico very
well. I don't know much about Mexico, the center of
Mexico, the city of Mexico, because, as I say, my
parents were very poor. They barely worked to
live. They spent a lot of money to go there. They
spent a lot of money to go there. But now... Now
there are many. Mexico is very beautiful. What
people want in Mexico is to be very kind to
everyone. There is no discrimination. Everyone
is the same. How many years did you have when you
came to the United States? Well, all of that comes
from the beginning of the world, according to what
I have read. From the beginning of the world comes
all of that that many did not want to know
each other. And so,
well, everything goes on. But now, in the present,
everything is peaceful, everyone is living very
well. Yes, but not in these years. In those years,
no. In the war, no. And ma'am, where in Mexico are
you from? I'm from Nuevo León. Nuevo León? In the
Villa de Santiago. Villa de Santiago. And what
year did you come to the United States? Well, on the
19th we moved here because me and him moved to
Mexico. Oh, to Mexico. And what town did you find?
Well, right there. The town we found was here in
Black Rocks. When
they passed us. In which town? In Piedras Negras.
In Piedras Negras, perhaps. Before that, they
called it Porfirio Díaz City. Before that? Yes,
many years ago. Ah, in what year? That's what they
called it. Because we came from Monterrey by train
to that place. And they asked us, people on the
train, where are you going? My mother would say,
let's go to Piedras Negras. And they would say, oh,
you're going to help Porfirio Díaz. That's how
they called him. But in that time that we came, it
was already in peace, but it was barely, as they say
in Mexico, starting to lift everything up.
Because of the revolution, everything was
destroyed. Everything. It was a very tough
war. Because, as I tell you, they would go, they
would burn there. They would remove a rail from the
line on this side and another on this side. Then
with a chain, they would tie the end of the rail of
this and this other and they would turn on the
machine's chain and go, look, there is the line.
They would get to a bridge, they would put dynamite
on the other side so that it would not serve the
others who came. That's why they did that. It's a
destruction of everything.
That's what I say, it's very hard. Now, it
fascinates you, just like the wars that have
happened here in other places. They destroy
everything. Well, I can't do it anymore. First,
please tell me
your name. What's your name? Right now, I don't
have many things in mind. No, tell him your name. My
name? Yes. Margarito Sustaita. And your town in
Mexico was... The town where you were born? Yes. I
was born in a hacienda in Mexico. And what is the
name of the hacienda? It's called Peotillos. In
what state was it? San Luis Potosí. And close to the
town, which town? Close to... The closest was...
It used to be Villa Iturbide, now it's Villa
Hidalgo. I'm registered and baptized there. It's
like... and here at the school is the place. And
what year were you born? In 1898. In 1898. And what
year did you come to the United States? 1919, in
November. I went this way. And what year did you
leave
your farm for the first time? Where was I the first
time I went? Yes. When I went this way,
I was in B. Wells planting onions. From there I came
to Viure. I was sowing in agriculture. In 1920 and
in 1921. From there I moved to another town called
Yula. It's on the way to San Marcos. I was sowing
there with a man in a ranch. His name was Agustín
Gargoyle. I've been here for 22, 23, and 24 years. I
came here in 1924. I came here in November, and I've
been living here ever since. In Guam. I came here to
the Boran to plant, for agriculture. Here in Guam
too? In the Boran, yes. I spent 14 years in the
Boran, and I came here three times. On the 27th, I
moved to Alboran to sow with our Yende.
And on the 41st, I left to sow with the last one, and
then I moved to
Alboran. Well, what was your father's name? My
father? Yes. My father's name was Rosalío
Sustaita. And your mother? Ventura Navarro. And
did they live all their lives there in the farm? No.
One year or two they were in that farm. Then,
because they had relatives in Monterrey, my
father came and my grandmother was there on his
side. My grandmother had been dead for years. When
we came to Monterrey, we were there for a year or
two. We came back to the farm. Y la última vez ya
cuando él se vino para acá, para Texas, a las Piscas
de Algodón. Y como los parientes que estaban ahí en
Monterrey, ahí estaban y él se enfermó aquí y se fue
para Monterrey y de ahí nos mandó a traer de allá a
Monterrey. Y de ahí los parientes se vinieron aquí
a la orilla del río, cerca de Viacuña. ¿En qué año?
In 1911, they arrived there. And my father went
there that year. And in 1912, he sent us from there
to that place there. And there we were, when the
revolution in Mexico was 13, we were already
there. And from there, I spent seven years in that
place, and from there I came here. in 1919, because
the revolution left everything. Life was very
hard there. And we came in search of work to make a
living. And here, as there was no agriculture in
that place, I had to sow in agriculture too. And
that's it.
And then I left, I stopped sowing, I got a job in the
dining room at the school. I worked there for 20
years. And
then they kicked me out because of my age. And I've
always worked without a job, because I don't go to
work because of my age. I'm going to work. How old
are you? You're 75 years old now. No, I'm not 75. You
don't have to know. To work, you have to work in the
work you do outside. that I can do. And that is what
is happening right now in the world. I am receiving
social security, which is what is helping me. When
you were young in Mexico,
what kind of things did you do? For example, was
there work for the children? No, very good. He
says, what were you doing there? Were you working
for the children or what? Oh, there in the farm, as I
told you the other time, I was taking care of some
beceros. Do you know what a becero is? Yes. It had a
dairy, as they call it here. Yes. Very big. You had
to bring up to 50 beceros. And that's the work I did
there. I would take them to the pasture, I would
take care of them. In the afternoon, I would take
them to the corral. I would give them pasture and I
would take care of them. And that's where I would
work. For how many years did you live in this farm?
In this farm? Yes. I tell you that sometimes we were
there, sometimes we were in Monterrey. Yes. But
I...
In that farm I went to school, but very few, not
many. When I learned to read and write, little to
tell. Because here with my children, my children
that I was sowing, when the fishing came, they told
me that I was going to weigh the cotton to all those
who were fishing there. That's what he gave me. I
gave him, on Saturday, a sheet of paper with all the
names of those who were peeping, how many pounds
each one had and how much money it was. He just paid
for everything. And if someone asked him, well,
you have so many pounds, how are you? And if someone
said, well, no, you're wrong. I already told him,
well, it's settled with me. They fixed the level
and his account was in the wrong. As I said, I don't
take anything from anyone. I take everything from
everyone. At night I had a lot of work to get
everyone's account. Because I had up to 150 hands.
And I had to get everyone's account every day. At
night I had to get everyone's account. And how much
money each person earned. That
was my job here. Yes. Well, this is where I
exercised more the... the... the numbering. In
that. Because over there, no... In that time in
Mexico it was very... well... as I thought hours
later that I was here. From the people over there.
Very good lands. With the water that would fall,
they would raise crops. Because the land wouldn't
break down. They would store it. What would be sown
with that water would be used for farming. Because
they would go there very often. But there was no
one... No one to open the agriculture. As I said,
people were very ignorant, they didn't know
anything. The owners of those places, no. But what
was the name of the owner of the farm? The owner of
the farm? Yes. His name was... His name was
Morieles. Yes. His name was Ignacio Morieles, the
owner of the farm. He had children. But his name was
Ignacio Morieles. He had a house... It was almost a
block away. It was just a house. It was a house, as
they called it there. Who knows if you've read or
heard of it. It was a house
of a count. It had a house. It had two floors. Below,
it was just a cellar. Outside, around. And inside,
There were rooms like this, like this, and like
this, and like this. And in the middle, they were
just gardens that were made with a fountain of
water in the middle. And inside that farm, there
were many men who worked. There was the bakery,
there was the market. For me, the farm. And I had the
work they had there. People who occupied, men and
women, to do the work there in the farmhouse.
Because there was one who was there, who was named
there, administrator. He was in charge, the
owners were in San Luis. But he was in charge there
of everything. The owners live in San Luis, in the
city. And another man is in charge of the
farmhouse. It's like here, a man has a ranch. Well,
if he doesn't want to live here, he has a man to take
care of the ranch. That's how it was there. The
house, here to the front, was long, it had many
rooms and portals.
And wide, almost like from here to the street, wide
the portal. And the rooms were here to the inside.
And from there, from the portal to the outside, it
was from the ground below, it was like San
Otrocina. Filled with land in pure gardens. That
they had there of flowers, plants and everything.
Very beautiful. And on this side where the house of
the hacienda ended, the pader was pure stone. Mix,
so thick, the pader. And there was a large gate and
it had an arch on the door of the hacienda. And on the
inside, they had, at that time there were no cars,
they had bogies. And they had horses to light the
bogies when the one in charge of the farm wanted to
go out for a walk with the family. And they had a very
big square, almost a block of barns, big. And from
the ones that went into the room over there, from
there to the barn, there were like five
warehouses. Big, long. They were like... What do
they have in their mouths? They were big. They were
stuck together. And in that store they had a lot
of... No, they don't have anything. Maybe you
don't know it or haven't seen it. They call it
lechubilla. That's where they get the lister to
make the roux. Yes. That's where they get it. and
palm trees. Do you know what a palm tree is? Well,
that palm tree, the branch is so tall, the branch is
long, the palm tree is very thin. And there they
make clothes too. Well, that's what produced a lot
of that place. And from there, that's the work they
had in those warehouses. And they made, well, some
big, so tall, round, so tall. And they would board
to San Luis where they would ask for train vans full
of... And they would board to San Luis where they
would ask for them. And from there, the church that
was there would continue. The church was very big,
full of stone, full of concrete. And the farm. And
over there, there were the rooms of those who
worked there, The secretaries and everything.
And then there was the school for women and the
school for men. That's where I went to school. For
all the children in the hacienda? They were like
this, they came to Callasina. Well, they made a
corner here. They were in this and here, and we were
in this and here. And then there was a very big
warehouse, very big, that had a lot of things in
there.
And I only came to study, I started number three.
Yes. But when it was like, I don't know here, they
went as inspectors, who are going to see how high
one is in reading. There were books that I had to
study. And the teacher would take the book, and I
would tell him everything. I would give it to him.
And the reading books, to read. And then the
arithmetic, the numbers, to do the math and all
that. And that year, of all those who were there, I
did all the things that the Lord told me to do. And
they said it was enough. But it wasn't enough
because it was a school like in a city that studies a
lot. Like my children, they studied in the ranch
there. It's not that the ranch is not the same here
in the town. It's very different because here they
learn more. And that's why they learned, but it
wasn't enough. And that's what happened. And what
kind of work did your father have in this farm?
Well, for his work, it was... That same farm had
chickens. And since it was very big, I think, who
knows if it would reach more than just the land it
had. Chickens? Yes, from that farm. It's like
wagons, you know? Oh, yes. It's like wagons. It's
like wagons. It's like wagons. It's like wagons.
It's like wagons.
It's like wagons. Some earned money from other
farms that were here, and others earned money from
other farms that were here. And they brought the
same thing to make the rice. That's what they
brought. They brought goods for the people from
there. And from here they came in loaded with this,
which they call istle. Yes. From here is what they
brought. That's why the warehouses they had there
were full of that material. When they sent an
order, a big order, they had two tramways
stretched out by mules. Because the depot of the
train that passed, I think it was like Vieja del
Colegio. They had two tramways, platforms, and
they loaded everything with the mules stretched
out for them. And the people would carry them on the
train. And they would come back empty-handed to
take more, until they filled it all up. And that was
the work they had to do. And your mother, did she
have a job too? No, she didn't work in that place.
No, she didn't get to work. She did work here on the
outside, like any other sewing that they could do.
What kind of house did your family have in the farm?
What kind of houses? Yes, for their families. Do
you know that this farm was formed with a village?
Yes. And it was big, with many houses. Everyone
had, like here, like here I am, I have here my yard
and everything. Here they had those houses. But no
one paid a penny. No? No. They didn't pay rent, they
didn't pay taxation, they didn't pay anything.
They were living there. All the people. That's
what they had. And they had a right side and a left
side. And then they crossed the street. In the form
of a town. What kind of material was there? There
were houses that were made there. And here I have
seen two houses that are called adobe. Yes. Well,
that's how the houses were made. Yes. There,
adobe. It's not that... The Adobo is so wide. In the
Revolution, the Adobo's bullets didn't go
through.
Because it's so wide, that's how you can see it. And
so long, that's how you can see it. There's a lot of
defense for the people there. Well, what kind of
things happened in this area during the first
years of the Revolution? The first years? Yes. In
1910, 1911, 1912, what kind of things happened in
the hacienda? Soldiers or other problems? I
didn't understand
the people very well. What kind of work did they do?
Or what things did they do? Well, tell me about the
life in the farm during the first years of the
revolution.
Tell me about these things. The people, the farm
had a lot of land. Yes. Now, outside the houses, it
was already called here, pastas. He had a lot of
maguey. Do you know maguey? Yes. I have here three
very big ones. Well, the maguey, the people went to
the pastas and it was almost even. It was maguey and
nopal. In Mexico tuna is given a lot. Cardona. That
tuna is... They do a lot of things with it. Yes. And
there are tuna cheeses that they call it. There's
honey that they call tuna. Others call it, it's a
little thicker, they give it another name. And
from the tuna seeds, they fatten the browns. They
fatten the browns with the tuna seeds. And a lot of
people were going to be named there to break a
maguey. That's to get water and honey from the
maguey. Maguey water is very healthy, very
healthy, better than coffee. Well, people would
go in the morning, they would bring the honey, big
buckets or whatever they could, and they would
bring it home. In the morning and in the afternoon.
And where they made holes in the maguey like this,
Everything that was down there, from the head of
the maguey up there, gave the honey. Well, they put
a stone in the cover, in the hole, so that the
coyotes or other animals, and if the coyote tried
to remove the stone, they would put it, there's a
lot, a kind of thorn that they call it there,
coconoste, it's very thorny. Yes. That's the
cane, it's thin, but it has a lot of thorns. It's
thin, but it has a lot of thorns, very big thorns.
And that's what they put on it so that the coyote
doesn't get hurt. And in the month of June, you saw
the paste that looked like a stick. It was the
kiyote that they made. Yes. You see that many
people went to the paste, cut the kiyote, with a lot
of dry straw, dry marguerite, and I made a fire and I
put it in the fire. I took it to the house, I made a
well in the ground, I threw a lot of firewood, I
threw stones down, and then I had a lot of firewood
down, I put the firewood inside and then I covered
it up and I threw firewood. The next day it was well
cooked and very sweet. Well, that farm had a lot of
Many things had a tree that they called
garambullo.
That one throws the fruit like the grape. At the end
of May it is blooming, you can only see the white
flowers. And by the end of June
it is already ripe. That is the garambullo. And in
the month of August, the nopalera, that you can
only see it colored, all that is pure tuna. And
people grab a piece like that and make it, because
the store sells them. It's not very expensive,
right? It's not very expensive. And everyone
grabs a piece like that and goes to cut the tuna with
a, they make a A piece of board or any piece of stick.
They put a knife on top of it. You see that the crown
of the tuna, the fin of the tuna, they give it like
this, just that everything is not cut. And then
with the same knife they cut it down. And there are
people who are working. They named it there,
peeling the tuna and taking out the pure tuna and
putting it in baskets. And they take it to work.
That's the work that exists. It's that in the month
of August there's a lot of that there. A lot. And the
hacienda there had a garden, like that, of the
house of the hacienda, like that, a garden. Here
they had everything. Trees, fruits and iron. They
had vegetables and everything. That was to
support
the house and the farm. It was very peaceful.
People were used to it. They were used to it. Like
here, we are used to living like this. People were
the same. Living well. But no one paid anything.
No, they didn't pay anything. What did they pay?
Income? Transactions? No. They all had their own
places. Many had a store to sell something. Some
made shoes. Others were sastres. Do you know what
sastres are? Women were also sastres. Some were
fashionistas, dressed like the people of
Margenza. They tried to make a living. That was
what they did. But the work was the same. Many who
didn't work in the hacienda They sowed, there were
places where the soil was clean. There they sowed
everything. Because there, in that place, it's
not very hot, nor is it very cold. It's just like
that. What height was it? What height? At what
height? Well, it's not very cold and it's not very
hot. It's in the mountains, right? Because here
it's very hot. Yes. And it's very cold. Yes. Well, I
didn't know the snow that they said, like here.
Yes. There, I heard that they said... It snowed in
the mountains, but I never saw it there. Not even
the cold air from the north. Until I came here to the
border, to the banks of the Rio Grande, there in
Miacuña and Piedra Nera, there I came to see the
north. It wasn't cold there. In the morning, just
like in that time, it was just scorching. And it was
like ice in the night, that dawns whitening. That
was all there was. But there was no cold air. It was
beautiful. The plants don't wash because they
freeze hard, like here. Here in the north it's cold
and it burns things. If it was cold like here, there
wouldn't be that kind of plants in the pastas.
Maguey doesn't freeze. Nor does nopal. But there
are other plants that do freeze. And that's what
was there. And a lot of people plant outside. They
have a lot of land. They plant everything there in
the work they do. They plant corn. Between the
corn, they planted beans. They planted pumpkin.
Do you know what that is? Yes. Well, there's
another plant that they call corn from Teja. It's a
big wheel. Corn from Texas? Corn from Texas, they
call it. It's bigger. They plant it here and it
grows, and here they plant it like this. And those
grains are filled with those little balls. Yes.
Well, all this was given between corn, and here
it's not given. Here it burns. The same heat of the
corn doesn't let it dry. And that's how it is. When
the corn is dry, they cut it. And they do it a lot. And
then you see the land that looks like the land of so
many pumpkins. Of all of them. It's for the same
people. They use it for many things. Now the beans
are the same as the corn. Because there in Mexico,
years have passed and I don't know how it will be
now. Because since I came from there, from
Hacienda Piotrillo, from 2012, I haven't gone
back there. It was in 1912. 1912 that I came here to
the river, to the border here. To the border. What
were you doing? Why did you go to the border?
Because my father is here, in this place, in the
middle of Piedras Negras and Viacuña. And he
brought them from there, so we could come to where
he was. And that's why we came from there. That's
why I tell you that he didn't... And what kind of
work did he have on the border? Here, agriculture.
Agriculture, too. In that place... Because that
man... He was from Monterrey. He had a lot of land
between Piedaneras and Viacuña. And he sent a man
to come here to Texas to talk to the Mexicans who
were sowing here. And I told them, well, I was
coming here to the house. And as I was coming here,
he said, well, say hello. Well, you are sowing
here. ¿Qué condiciones le da aquí el Señor a usted?
¿Qué condiciones le da aquí el Señor a usted? ¿Qué
condiciones le da aquí el Señor a usted? ¿Qué
conditions le da aquí el Señor a usted? ¿Qué
conditions le In credit for goods that he uses, you
set a limit. In money that you need to move the work,
you're just going to change. And if another
person, another Mexican man, had mules and
everything to do the work, he had guayines, you
know what guayines are? Yes. Well, he had
guayines, he had cows. Well, they took everything
he had. And they didn't cost a cent. Everything was
for free. The man. He was just going to pay for the
family's passage. On the train. On the train? On
the train. From the farm to the... From where they
were, there to Piedras Negras. Yes, from his farm
to Piedras Negras. The whole family. Yes, the
whole family. That's what the husband was going to
pay for. And the husband and everything he had,
they didn't pay. They took it to the train station,
but they didn't pay anything. It was free. And they
put it where they were going to build the house. But
there are no problems with soldiers or anything in
the hacienda during these years? No. No. Later,
what happened to the hacienda? Because this
place... They would take water from a river that
passes through there, and that water would water
the whole land. There they would plant wheat, they
would plant oats, they would plant beans, they
would plant corn, they would plant cotton. This is
the land on the border. Yes. But during the
revolution, what happened with the... And that
place remained, because during the revolution,
Like a son of that man who opened that job. It was the
same name and he was a junior. Yes. He gathered
people there and stood up in favor of Carranza.
Yes. To fight against the government that was
there before. Yes. When the people of the
government came to that place, then...